Draft Journal Article

Discovering Cryptic Breeding Sites by Radio Tracking Coconut 
Rhinoceros Beetles, Oryctes rhinoceros (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae)

Abstract

Coconut rhinoceros beetle (CRB), Oryctes rhinoceros L., is a 
serious pest of coconut trees and other palms throughout 
Southeast Asia and on several Pacific Islands. Adults kill palms 
when they bore into crowns to feed on sap. Larvae feed only on 
dead plant material at breeding sites. Eradication is possible if 
all breeding sites are located and destroyed. A field trial was 
performed on Guam to test the feasibility of using radio-tagged 
adults to discover cryptic breeding sites. Of 34 radio-tagged 
beetles that were released, 19 were successfully tracked to 
landing sites, 14 were lost when they flew beyond the range of 
our receivers and one beetle did not fly. Two of the landing 
sites were confirmed breeding sites as indicated by presence of 
other CRB at the same site. None of the radio-tagged beetles were 
caught in numerous pheromone traps in the vicinity of release 
sites.

Using animals to find aggregations of conspecifics is not a new 
idea. For example, by exploiting the gregarious nature of goats, 
the Judas goat method is a vital tool for detecting goats at low 
densities and a monitoring tool to confirm eradication (Campbell et al., 2005)
. Radiotelemetry collars are fitted to select goats, which are 
released and allowed to seek out other goats. Judas goats are 
then radio tracked, either on foot or by helicopter, and 
accompanying goats are shot. This approach allows the last 
individuals to be removed. Judas goats have been used 
successfully in a number of island eradication programs. Recent 
development of light-weight, miniaturized radio-tracking 
transmitters now allows application of this technique to insects 
and other small animals which aggregate. Here, we report on a 
field trial to determine the feasibility of radio-tracking 
coconut rhinoceros beetles (CRB), Oryctes rhinoceros (L.) 
(Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae) to find cryptic breeding site 
aggregations.

CRB is a major pest of coconut palm, Cocos nucifera L. (Arecales: 
Arecaceae). Adult beetles damage and sometimes kill palms when 
they bore into crowns of palms to feed on sap. Palms die when 
boring and feeding activity kills the apical meristem. In 
contrast to adults, CRB grubs cause no damage. They feed on 
decaying vegetation at breeding sites which include dead standing 
coconut palms, fallen coconut logs, rotting coconut stumps and 
decaying wood of many tree species. Breeding sites are also found 
in piles of compost, sawdust and manure where these materials are 
available. When CRB breeding sites are abundant following damage 
from typhoons, war, or large scale agricultural operations, a 
self sustaining positive feedback loop may be initiated where 
large numbers of CRB adults kill large numbers of palms creating 
new breeding sites which generate even more CRB. This worst case 
scenario was observed in the Palau Islands when CRB arrived near 
the end of World War II. A CRB population outbreak was fueled by 
availability of abundant breeding sites in the form of trees 
killed by military activities. Fifty per cent of coconut palms 
were killed by CRB throughout the Parlay Islands and some of the 
smaller islands lost all of their coconut palms (Gressitt, 1953).

After feeding in the crowns of palms, adults of both sexes return 
to breeding sites where they mate and females oviposit. Location 
of breeding sites is facilitated by an aggregation pheromone 
produced by adult males (Hallett et al., 1995). The 
feeding-mating-oviposition cycle occurs several times during an 
adults lifetime (Gressitt, 1953). Vander Meer (1987)developed a 
body mass index, per cent emergent weight (PEW), which is 
strongly correlated with the physiological and behavioral status 
of CRB adults. PEW can be used to estimate current state of a 
beetle within the feeding-mating-oviposition cycle.

CRB first was detected in Guam in the Tumon Bay tourist hotel 
area in September, 2007. A delimiting survey indicated that the 
infestation was restricted to only a small of the island (<500 
ha) and an eradication project was launched (Smith et al., 2008). 
The project relied on mass trapping using pheromone traps to 
capture adults, and sanitation to remove rotting vegetation used 
as breeding sites. The traps were baited with the CRB aggregation 
pheromone, ethyl 4-methyloctanoate (Hallett et al., 1995) 
commercially available as oryctalure (P046; ChemTica 
Iternacional, Heredia, Costa Rica). Four detector dogs were 
trained to assist in finding breeding sites on the ground by 
sniffing out CRB grubs.

Despite these efforts, CRB damage in central Tumon Bay remained 
high and the infestation spread to all parts of Guam by 2010 
making eradication unfeasible. Attempts at population suppression 
using Oryctes nudivirus (OrNV), the preferred biocontrol agent 
for CRB (Bedford, 1980; Bedford, 1986), also failed. It has 
recently been determined that the Guam CRB population is 
genetically different from other populations in Asia and the 
Pacific and it is considered to be a new invasive biotype of of 
CRB which has escaped from biocontrol by OrNV (Marshall et al., 2015)
. In addition to being resistant to all currently available 
isolates of OrNV, it appears that the CRB-Guam biotype behaves 
differently. CRB breeding sites are commonly found in coconut 
palm crowns on Guam but only occasionally elsewhere (Moore et al., 2015)
 and pheromone traps baited with oryctalure are not very 
attractive, catching only a small proportion of beetles in the 
vicinity of each trap (Moore, unpublished). 

Eradication of CRB from an island is difficult once this pest has 
become established. The only proven tactic for eradication is a 
vigorous sanitation program which discovers and destroys all 
active and potential breeding sites. The single successful CRB 
eradication to date occur ed on the tiny (36 km²) Niuatoputapu 
Island (also known as Keppel Island), which lies between Samoa 
and Tonga, using sanitation alone (Gressitt, 1953; Catley, 1969)
.  Currently available pheromone traps, although useful for 
detection and surveillance, are not attractive enough to provide 
significant population suppression in mass trapping operations. 
Mass trapping coupled with sanitation during 1971 through 1974 
failed to eradicate CRB on two islands in Fiji (ref needed).  The 
eradication attempt was abandoned when it was determined that 
there was “a low but persistent population which could not be 
trapped. ... It appeared that possible results from the 
indefinite continuation of the trial were no longer commensurate 
with the costs” (Bedford, 1980).Check on these quotes

As previously mentioned, four detector dogs for CRB were trained 
and employed for the first time on Guam. The dogs were trained to 
sniff out CRB grubs and it was hoped that they would enable us to 
find remaining, cryptic breeding sites in the final stages of 
eradication. The detector dogs were a very expensive component of 
the Guam CRB eradication program and they were retired after two 
years of service when it became evident that eradication was no 
longer feasible.

In this article, we report results of a field trial intended to 
test the concept of following radio-tagged CRB to cryptic 
breeding sites as an alternative to using detector dogs. 

  Materials and Methods

  Radio Tracking Equipment

All radio tracking equipment was purchased from Advanced 
Telemetry Systems, Isanti, Minnesota. We used A2414 glue-on 
transmitters which weigh 300 mg. Each of 32 transmitters used in 
the trial operated at a unique frequency allowing us to track 
multiple targets simultaneously. Two transmitters were reused on 
two different beetles. 

We used four R410 scanning receivers equipped with three-element 
folding Yagi antennas (Fig. [fig:Radio-tracking-reciever-and]). 
Two receivers operated in the 146 to 150 MHz frequency band and 
two operated in the 162 to 166 MHz band. 

Each of the 4 trackers used a GPS receiver (Garmin Oregon 650) to 
record waypoints.

  Collection, Selection and Preparation of Test insects

CRB used for radio tracking were caught in pheromone traps baited 
with ethyl 4-methyloctanoate (Oryctalure; P046; ChemTica 
Iternacional, Heredia, Costa Rica). Beetles were removed from the 
traps within one week of capture, placed in tubs containing moist 
peat moss, fed fresh banana slices and allowed to rest for at 
least three days.

Beetles were selected for flight capability at least one day 
prior to use in the radio-tracking trial. Groups of about 30 
beetles were placed in moist peat moss in a metal bowl which they 
could exit only by flight. The bowl was supported on a stand 
inside a flight chamber consisting of a large (121 liter) garbage 
container and a lid was affixed. Beetles were left in the flight 
chamber overnight. Those that ended up on the flight chamber 
floor were deemed to have flown. All others were rejected from 
the radio-tracking field trial.

Flight-capable beetles were marked with a unique four-digit code 
engraved on one elytrum using a laser engraver (Fenix Flyer, 
Synrad Inc., Mukilteo, WA, United States). The sex, mass and 
elytral dimensions of each beetle were recorded.

A transmitter was glued to the pronotum of each beetle using a 
hot-melt glue gun (Fig. [fig:Radio-tracking-reciever-and]). Prior 
to transmitter attachment, the beetle pronotum was abraded with 
sandpaper to improve adhesion. Each glue-on transmitter had a 
mass of approximately 300 mg and was secured with approximately 
250 mg of adhesive.

Test insects were stored and transported in lidded plastic bins 
approximately (45 cm by 30 cm by 18 cm) containing about 12 cm of 
damp peat moss. Because not all beetles were released when first 
taken into the field, some beetles remained in storage for up to 
six days.

  Release Sites

Radio-tagged CRB were released and tracked at two locations on 
Guam: the University of Guam Agricultural Research Station in 
Yigo and the War in the Pacific National Historical Park in Asan 
(Fig. [fig:Beetle-tracks.]). 

The Yigo site is an inland agricultural experiment station farm 
bordered by a residential area and uncultivated forest areas that 
include coconut palms and other trees. At the time of the field 
trial, most coconut palms on the station were showing signs of 
CRB damage. The release site (144.872750º E, 13.531333º N) was in 
the middle of an uncultivated field. Beetles were released in the 
vicinity of three types of pheromone traps baited with 
oryctalure: standard vaned bucket traps (n=3 traps), barrel traps 
(n=31), and DeFence traps (n=4). Vaned bucket traps are the 
standard pheromone traps for CRB developed by Hallett et al. (1995)
. Barrel traps and DeFence traps are experimental designs (A. M., 
unpublished). 

The Asan site is roughly triangular with the ocean bordering one 
side, coastal wetlands on another, and forested hillside on the 
third. The park itself is a large, open, grassy field and 
includes with coconut palms on the edges, many of which displayed 
CRB damage at the time of the study. The release site 
(144.708537º E, 13.473904º N) was at the middle of a large grassy 
field. ASAN TRAP INFO NEEDED.

  Tracking Procedure

Beetles were transported to release sites in plastic storage 
bins. The lid of the bin was removed at dusk (roughly 19:30) and 
the container was closed at roughly 21:30. Once the containers 
were opened, CRB activity was carefully monitored using a thermal 
camera (FLIR Systems Inc., Wilsonville, Oregon; E4 infrared 
camera). Observation under the infrared camera revealed that a 
beetle's flight muscles warm to about 37º C in preparation for 
flight. Pre-flight beetles were briefly viewed under red light to 
record the identification number and determine the frequency of 
the radio transmitter. Though nearly all beetles flew 
independently, several beetles that had not yet flown by the end 
of experimentation were encouraged to flight by removing them 
from the peat moss and throwing them into the air to facilitate 
takeoff.

CRB were pursued on foot following release and were tracked until 
a landing site was determined or until the transmitter signal was 
lost. In either case, a waypoint was recorded at the landing site 
or the last point of signal reception using a GPS unit.

Landing sites were visited on the following morning, and attempts 
were made to more precisely determine the location of each 
beetle. Beetle locations were monitored over several days, and 
beetles and or transmitters were recovered, when possible, at the 
end of the experiment. CRB and transmitters were successfully 
recovered by digging up beetles that buried into soil or compost; 
however the locations of CRB tracked to coconut crowns could not 
be as exactly determined due to the density of the frond foliage.

  Analysis

Data from the field trial were stored in two text files (Supp. [ detector_beetles/4045191vqgrvx/detector_beetles1.csv ||detector_beetles1.csv]
; Supp. [ detector_beetles/4045191vqgrvx/trap_locations.csv ||trap_locations.csv]
) and analysis was performed using an iPython notebook (Supp. [ detector_beetles/4045191vqgrvx/detector_beetles.ipynb ||detector_beetles.ipynb]
).

Per cent emergent weight (PEW) was calculated using the following 
formula derived by Moore et al. (2015) following Vander Meer et al. (1975)
 and Vander Meer (1987): PEW=\frac{100\times M}{0.021\times L\times W-3.58}

 where M = current mass of beetle in grams, L, W = length and 
width of elytra in mm.

  Results and Discussion

Weather conditions during the field trial were mainly clear with 
occasional periods of rain and overcast skies. On release dates, 
August 8 to August 14, average temperature ranged from 27°C to 
29°C and relative humidity was between 80% to 88%. Beetles were 
generally tracked under clear skies with the exception of August 
9 during which light showers occurred.

  Breeding Site Discovery

Of 34 radio-tagged beetles that were released, 19 were 
successfully tracked to landing sites, 14 were lost when they 
flew beyond the range of the receivers and one beetle did not fly 
(Fig. [fig:Outcomes-for-radio-tracked]). Most of CRB tracked to 
landing sites were in tree tops (n=11) and the rest were on or 
below the ground (n=8).

Two of the landing sites were confirmed breeding sites as 
indicated by the presence of other CRB at the same site. 

The first breeding site we discovered by radio-tracking was in an 
extremely cryptic and unsuspected microhabitat: in a hole in a 
large rotting branch of a breadfruit tree (Artocarpus altilis), 
about six meters above the ground. In this case, the receiver had 
become detached and the marked beetle was not recovered. However, 
3 other CRB adults were occupying the hole. It is highly likely 
that this breeding site was in a branch broken by high winds 
experienced when Typhoon Dolphin passed over Guam in May 2015, 
about 3 months before the radio-tracking trial. 

The second breeding site we discovered was beneath a barrel trap. 
... NEED DESCRIPTION

Ten landing sites in coconut palm crowns were considered to be 
potential breeding sites but we did not have time or equipment to 
confirm these. Arboreal breeding sites may be common on Guam (Moore et al. (2015)
).

  Tracks and Displacement

Distance between release sites and landing sites was calculated 
for the 19 beetles tracked to a landing site. The remaining 14 
beetles flew beyond the range of our radio receivers, about 500 
m. Mean displacement could not be estimated, but median 
displacement was 333 m, with no significant difference between 
release sites (Fig. [fig:Displacement-of-beetles]).

There is little information available on the natural flight range 
of CRB. In a laboratory experiment, Hinckley (1973) observed that 
tethered beetles attached to a flight mill flew between 2 and 4 
km with a flight duration of 2 to 3 hours. However, field 
observations indicate that natural flight is limited to a few 
hundred meters and this distance is influenced by the 
availability of feeding or breeding sites. 

Kamarudin et al. (2004) performed a mark-release-recapture study 
in a small (4.5 ha) oil palm replanting area containing a grid of 
49 pheromone traps. Beetles captured in the traps were were 
marked with the trap number and released. Five of these beetles 
were recaptured in traps and displacement was calculated. 
Unfortunately, the total number of marked beetles released is not 
reported. Displacement averaged 118 m with a range of 51 m to 186 
m. The authors acknowledge shortcomings of their study: “These 
values may be below the actual flight potential as their flights 
were monitored using pheromone traps. However, the conducive 
environment, availability of food and abundant breeding sites in 
the replanting area logically play a role in the flight 
distance.”

  Mass relationships

Masses of CRB landing on the ground were not significantly 
different than those landing in treetops for females (4.486 g, 
4.407 g; Welch's t = 0.117; p = 0.914) and males (3.638 g; 5.043 
g; Welch's t = -2.2749; p = 0.053).

However, mean percent emergent weight of CRB landing on the 
ground was higher than those landing in treetops (Fig. [fig:Percent-emergence-weight]
). A possible explanation for this observation is that 
individuals with low percent emergent weight were hungry and 
therefore flew to treetops in order to bore into crowns to feed 
and beetles with lower percent emergence weight were searching 
for breeding sites in which to ovipost or find mates. Thus, if 
the objective is to locate ground based breeding sites, beetles 
with low PEW should be selected.

  Response to Traps

Despite the fact that beetles were released within proximity of 
active pheromone traps, none were trapped. The mean trap catch 
rate of pheromone traps at the Yigo experiment station during 
August 2015 was 0.03 beetles per trap-day for standard bucket 
traps (n=3 traps), 0.13 for barrel traps (n=31), and 0.15 for 
DeFence traps (n=4). In addition, no marked beetles were trapped 
in fish gill netting draped over a greenwaste pile at the Yigo 
site. This pile trapped 0.50 beetles per trap-day during August 
2015. TRAP LOCATIONS AND CATCH DATA FOR ASAN NEEDED. 

If we assume that the wild beetles respond to traps in the same 
way as the radio-tagged beetles, then we can estimate that the 
suite of traps in the vicinity of the the release points catches 
less than one in 33 (<3%) of wild beetles. This low trap 
performance is consistent with results from previous 
mark-release-recapture data from Guam (A. M., unpublished). It is 
possible that oryctalure is less attractive to individuals of the 
CRB Guam biotype than to individuals of other other biotypes. 
Results indicate that none of the currently available CRB 
trapping methods are useful for population reduction of CRB-Guam.

  Why CRB is a Good Candidate for Radio Tracking as a Method for 
  Finding Conspecifics

CRB has characteristics which make this species a good candidate 
for radio tracking. First, this is a large, powerful beetle which 
can fly with the additional mass of a transmitter. Second, CRB 
aggregates at breeding sites. And third, CRB do not fly during 
the day, providing time to precisely locate landing points. 
Although 14 tagged beetles were lost when they flew beyond the 
range of our receivers, it is probable that we could have tracked 
these to precise landing sites with the use of a helicopter.

Our feasibility study was a success in that all but one of the 34 
radio-tagged beetles flew and two of these were tracked to 
cryptic breeding sites confirmed by the presence of other CRB. If 
this 'Judas beetle' method is to be used in an eradication 
program, there may be concerns about introduction of additional 
CRB adults. In this case, perhaps only sterile males should be 
used. 

  Acknowledgments

Thanks to the USDA Forest Service for funding this project under 
grant 15-DG-11052021-205. Thanks also to Sheri Lee Smith, USDA 
Forest Service, to U.S. Park Service staff at the War in the 
Pacific Historical Park, and to Roland Quitugua and staff of the 
Guam Coconut Rhinoceros Beetle Project.




References

[Bedford 1980] Bedford, Geoffrey O, "Biology, ecology, and control of palm rhinoceros beetles", Annual Review of Entomology (1980), 309--339.

[Bedford 1986] Bedford, G O, "Biological control of the rhinoceros beetle (Oryctes rhinoceros) in the South Pacific by baculovirus", Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment (1986), 141--147.

[Campbell et al. 2005] Campbell, Karl and Donlan, C. Josh, "Feral goat eradications on islands", Conservation Biology (2005), 1362--1374.

[Catley 1969] Catley, A, "The coconut rhinoceros beetle Oryctes rhinoceros (L)", International Journal of Pest Management: Part A (1969), 18--30.

[Gressitt 1953] Gressitt, Linsley J, "The coconut rhinoceros beetle (Oryctes rhinoceros) with particular reference to the Palau Islands", Bernice P. Bishop Museum (1953), 1--83.

[Hallett et al. 1995] Hallett, Rebecca H and Perez, A L and Gries, G and Gries, R and H. D. Pierce, Jr and Yue, Junming and Oehlschlager, A C and..., "Hallett 1995 aggregation pheromone coconut rhinoceros beetle oryctes.pdf" (1995), 1549--1570.

[Hinckley 1973] Hinckley, A Dexter, "Ecology of the Coconut Rhinoceros Beetle, Oryctes rhinoceros (L.) (Coleoptera: Dynastidae)", Biotropica (1973), 111--116.

[Kamarudin et al. 2004] Kamarudin, Norman and Washid, Mohd B, "Immigration and activity of $\backslash$textit{Oryctes rhinoceros} within a small oil palm replanting area", Journal of Oil Palm Research (2004), 64{$\backslash$textendash}77.

[Marshall et al. 2015] Marshall, Sean David Goldie and Vaqalo, Maclean and Moore, Aubrey and Quitugua, Roland and Jackson, Trevor A, "A new invasive biotype of the coconut rhinoceros beetle (Oryctes rhinoceros) has escaped from biocontrol by Oryctes rhinocer..." (2015).

[Moore et al. 2015] Moore, Aubrey and Jackson, Trevor and Quitugua, Roland and Bassler, Paul and Campbell, Russell, "Coconut rhinoceros beetles ( Coleoptera : Scarabaeidae ) develop in arboreal breeding sites in Guam", Florida Entomologist (2015), 1012--1014.

[Smith et al. 2008] Smith, Sheri Lee and Moore, Aubrey, "Early Detection Pest Risk Assessment Coconut Rhinoceros Beetle" (2008), 1--6.

[Vander Meer 1987] Vander Meer, Robert K, "Per cent emergent weight: a roadmap to adult rhinoceros beetle, Oryctes rhinoceros, behaviour", Journal of Insect Physiology (1987), 437--441.

[Vander Meer et al. 1975] Vander Meer, Robert K and Mclean, J A, "Indirect Methods of Determining the Emergent Weight of Oryctes rhinoceros (L.)", Annals of the Entomological Society of America (1975), 867--868.



  


[float Figure:
<Graphics file: /home/aubreymoore/Dropbox/detectorBeetles/Aubrey Analysis/4045191vqgrvx/aubrey_yagi_crb_cropped.png>

[Figure 1:
<fig:Radio-tracking-reciever-and>Radio-tracking receiver and 
coconut rhinoceros beetle with transmitter glued to pronotum.
]


]

[float Figure:
<Graphics file: /home/aubreymoore/Dropbox/detectorBeetles/Aubrey Analysis/4045191vqgrvx/outcomes.dot.png>

[Figure 2:
<fig:Outcomes-for-radio-tracked>Outcomes for radio-tracked 
beetles.
]


]

[float Figure:
[float Figure:
<Graphics file: /home/aubreymoore/Dropbox/detectorBeetles/Aubrey Analysis/4045191vqgrvx/yigo_tracks.jpg>

[Sub-Figure a:
Yigo release site.
]


]

[float Figure:
<Graphics file: /home/aubreymoore/Dropbox/detectorBeetles/Aubrey Analysis/4045191vqgrvx/asan_tracks.jpg>
[Sub-Figure b:
Asan release site.
]


][Figure 3:
<fig:Beetle-tracks.>Results of radio-tracking coconut rhinoceros 
beetles at the Yigo and Asan release sites. Pushpin icons 
represent waypoints for tracked beetles (color code: red = beetle 
ended up in crown of tree; yellow: beetle ended up on or below 
the ground; orange: beetle was lost when it flew beyond the range 
of radio-tracking receivers, orange lines are extrapolated tracks 
based on last observed bearing of radio signal). Circular icons 
represent pheromone traps (color code: cyan = barrel trap; orange 
= DeFence trap; red = bucket trap).
]


]

[float Figure:
<Graphics file: /home/aubreymoore/Dropbox/detectorBeetles/Aubrey Analysis/4045191vqgrvx/displacement.pdf>

[Figure 4:
<fig:Displacement-of-beetles>Displacement of beetles from release 
points within 48 h. The points at 500 m indicate beetles that 
flew beyond the range of the radio-tracking receivers. Difference 
between medians for beetles released at the two sites (Asan: 418 
m; Yigo: 275 m) are not significantly different (p = 0.36; 
bootstrap resampling with 10,000 iterations). Pooled median 
displacement was 333 m.
]


]

[float Figure:
[float Figure:
<Graphics file: /home/aubreymoore/Dropbox/detectorBeetles/Aubrey Analysis/4045191vqgrvx/outcome_vs_pew_females.pdf>

[Sub-Figure a:
Females. Mean per cent emergent weight for female beetles tracked 
to ground and tree top sites were not significantly different 
(82%, 74% respectively; Welch's t = 1.608; p = 0.195). 
]


]

[float Figure:
<Graphics file: /home/aubreymoore/Dropbox/detectorBeetles/Aubrey Analysis/4045191vqgrvx/outcome_vs_pew_males.pdf>

[Sub-Figure b:
Males. Mean per cent emergent weight for male beetles tracked to 
ground and tree top sites were significantly different (87%, 72% 
respectively; Welch's t = 4.174; p = 0.008). 
]


][Figure 5:
<fig:Percent-emergence-weight>Percent emergent weight of beetles 
tracked to ground sites and tree top sites.
]


]

